Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Lobs. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Eduardo Fernandez Duque. He
is Professor of Anthropology at the School of Arts
and Sciences with a secondary appointment at the School
of the Environment at Yale University. He is a
biological anthropologist with the g real interest in understanding
the evolution and maintenance of social systems. And today
we're focusing mostly on mating systems in private, by
parental care, co-operative breathing, natal dispersal and some other
related topics. So, Doctor Fernandez Duque, welcome to the
show. It's a big pleasure to everyone.
Thank you Ricardo. It's a pleasure and the pleasure
is mine. It's been an impressive program that you've
been developing over the years. So I'm honored to
be joining the, the host of speakers you've had
in the past. Thank you. Well,
thank you so much for the kind words. And
so to start off with uh what different kinds
of mating systems do we find across primate species?
Exactly.
So, uh before I answer specifically that I'd like
to make the distinction, it's gonna help us in
our conversation later on between social systems and mating
systems. OK. And this is one of those times
when maybe relating it to humans really helps us
get the message across. So we, we always try
to be very careful when we move between monkeys
and humans. But a social system, it's, it's the
kind of situation in which individuals of the different
sexes and different ages interact with each other socially,
behaviorally, demographically, but without any explicit reference to where
they are mating with each other, whether whether they
are having sex with each other or not. So,
when we talk about a mating system, we're referring
to in a very general sense who has sex
with whom. And again, further on, I suspect we
will be elaborating a little bit more on the
differences between having sex and actually reproducing with each
other. But we can come back, we can come
back to that later. So if we're gonna talk
about who has sex with whom who, who met
with whom in, in primates, uh you have them
of all kinds. Uh Most people are very familiar
with those species where you have several adult males
and several adult females and they're all mating with
all of, I mean, with each other, there are
patterns, of course, sometimes a male will concentrate most
of the mating opportunities and other males may not
be so lucky. Uh BUT usually made most of
the females do have access to mating. So we
talk about those groups as being multi male, multi
female mating systems. We may also refer to them
as polygynous, meaning that one male has access to
many females we have in primates as well. A
system that's very rare uh in, in most animals
definitely rare in primates and in humans, which is
a system where a single female may mate with
many males polyandry. And it's in primates, we only
see it in some relatively small primates monkeys of
South America. And then we have another system, which
is the system where I have focused my research,
which is a system where there is monogamous mating,
meaning that there's only one adult male mating with
one adult female. It is usually the case is
that when that happens, those animals also have some
kind of socially monogamous system. They are just spending
time with each other. So that in a nutshell,
it's a little bit range, big variation that we
see in primates for mating systems.
And what do we know about the factors that
influence mating systems in primates? That is if for
example, in a particular species, we find that polygyny,
polygyny is dominant or monogamy is dominant or any
other kind of mating system, what are the factors
that influence that? Exactly.
So it would have been interesting to have my
response to that question, say 57, 10 years ago,
it would have probably been different from what I'm
gonna say. Now, I am finding myself in the
last many years, immersing more and more into what
is known as the causal revolution, uh reading and
teaching and writing about causal inference. I'm trying to
really embrace the uncertainty that comes from the research
we do in primatology. Most of our research is
observational. Therefore, really talking about the factors that influence
sometimes convey to the public an understanding that we
have about the relationship between presumed causes and effects
that we do not have. So having made that
clarification that we, we be talking about factors that
influence what we really mean. What we study primates,
living primates in an ecological setting is what are
some factors that we see happening in a certain
relationship in a certain association with these mating systems
that we observe having made that clarification, which sometimes
of course, we're talking about mating systems in primates.
Maybe it isn't that serious if we do not
get the causal pathway correctly. But it is profoundly
important, the the misunderstanding we have in making causal
influence claims for very, very important social matters that
we're interested in. So what are some of the
factors the the the the typical culprits have been,
of course, all kinds of social and environmental factors
and a very, very general hypothesis that it is
so general that you cannot really test it adequately
is that when you have resources that are distributed
in space in a re relatively homogeneous manner, there
may be a situation that lends itself to a
higher probability of having a monogamous mating system. Why?
Because in mammals and this is very, very important
in mammals. Let's not forget that male and females
have very, very different reproductive biology. Females have a
pregnancy and females lactate males do not. And so
I think a very reasonable assumption is that that
conditions so much of the social systems and mating
systems of all mammals, primates included. So if the
resources say food are evenly distributed in space, the
assumption is that it is likely that females will
distribute in space also evenly because they only need
that similar amounts of food. And it is the
distribution of females in space that may condition that
may influence if if we allow ourselves to speak
in that matter how males may seek females and
how males may organize themselves spatially socially in terms
of mating with females. So we look at the
environment to understand pa patterns of mating systems. Then
of course, you you always have these questions, the,
the egg and the chicken uh challenge because what
comes first is very, very different, difficult to disentangle
in living systems. And so there's a lot of
data suggesting that it is more likely to have
a monogamy in those systems where you can also
recruit, engage the contribution of the male to the
care of the young. Because once you get that,
we're gonna be talking about that assume later on
by parental care or paternal care, then there are
higher benefits to both the male and the female
from sticking together than if the male were just
to mate with one female now and with the
second one later, so we look at social factors,
we look at ecological factors, we look at environmental
factors when I'm referring to factors that we can
actually measure in real time in the field.
And uh when it comes to monogamy, specifically, there's
this distinction between social and genetic monogamy. So what's
the distinction? And why does it matter?
The distinction is again, very, very simple to understand
for us humans, there is a difference between with
whom you have sex and with whom you have
kids, raise them, protect them and contribute resources. So
before the genetic revolution and by that, I mean,
what started occurring now more than 30 years ago
that we are able to obtain samples from the
wild animals. We studied to do genetic analysis before
that we had nothing but looking at who was
mating with whom. So you would have found a
group of all monkeys uh with a lot of
dedication, maybe you were able to identify who is
the male, who is the female that's very, very
difficult to do in this tax because males and
females look the same. And then you would conclude
that male a only mates with female. A and
so you would call that a social monogamy. You
may also call it monogamous. Ma but the truth
is that we didn't know where that mating really
resulted in pregnancies and births. It was through studies
of birds which are primarily monogamous. Most mammals are
not monogamous. Then we started learning about what has
become in the literature called EP CS extra pair
populations. And then we added a fertilizations to that
because an extra peer population was described, as I
see this female who is socially paired to this
male mating with the male outside the peer. That's
an extra peer population. Before genetics, we couldn't still
determine where that extra pair of copulation led to
having an infant with genetics. We could and we
started seeing that a huge, huge numbers of bird
species that have been described as socially monogamous were
not genetically monogamous. It wasn't true that a male
and a female were only reproducing with each other.
They were mating with each other, but they were
mating also with other males and other females. There
have been attempts, I mean, people have done the
same kinds of studies with all kinds of primate
species. And that's how we learned that even in
those systems that I was describing before, where you
have many males and many females mating with each
other living with each other, many times you have
sub reproductive skill. What we mean by that is
that it is usually one male who actually sires
most of the young even when the others may
be getting a bite here and there, they are
not really carrying the weight of producing the next
generation of individuals. We have several talks among primates
that are peer living where we see social monogamy
and we have some primates where people have evaluated
generic monogamy. Uh Our project is probably one of
the largest, if not the largest attempt at characterizing
social and generic monogamy in a nonhuman primate. And
much to our surprise, we have found that consistently
for all monkeys in Argentina, it is just that
male and that female who are sharing a space,
who are sharing a home, who are sharing feeding
activities that are only producing infants with each other.
We have never ever in all these years and
now we have evaluated over 100 pairs of putative
infants and fathers never have. We found evidence of
extra pair population always the male to whom we
are, which to whom we assign paternity. It has
always been the male that was in the group
with the female at the time of conception and
pregnancy. I have studied with colleagues in in Ecuador
and other socially monogamous primate, the TD and saki
monkeys with, I mean, we studied this with my
colleague, Tony Di Fiore with Saro Bell Marian Cook.
We have looked at other primates and in those
cases, the evidence is not as unequivocal that you
have genetic monogamy. In fact, our monkeys are today
one of the very few mammal species where you
just don't find any extra pair paternity. It remains
a puzzle. I am not convinced. I mean, if
you ask me, I bet my money that sooner
or later we're gonna find some data, some, some
evidence suggesting that every so often there is some
extra per attorney but so far none that we
have found.
And so at a certain point there, you mentioned
pair living. So could you tell us a little
bit more about what pair living is? And is
it related in any way to pair bonding or
not
peer living? And, and I, I think I didn't
address before something that's going to be important for
discussing peer living. Why it matters, the distinction between
social and genetic monogamy, it matters because it helps
you understand the pe living. So, I mean, e
evolution depends on, on you passing traits that are
inherited by the future generation, right? That's how traits
become more abundant in the population, how they become
fixed or not. So, really what matters if there's
some biological basis to the tendency to live in
pairs to focus your attention, your mating and reproduction
repression with one single adult be male or female,
it needs to pay off in terms of reproduction
of fitness. That's where the genetic monogamy is important.
What we mean by peer living is now going
back to the social system is that consistently everywhere
people have looked at all monkeys, everywhere people have
looked at titty monkeys from Panama down to Argentina
all the time. We just find one adult male
and one adult female and they function very cohesively.
They go about their lives very close to each
other. Traveling. I mean, most of the times if
you go to the forest in Ecuador, in Peru,
in Argentina, you'll find TD monkey adults and old
monkey adults within 3 5 m of each other
max every so often they may be further away.
So they're really close to each other. They are
coordinating their activities. One is feeding more most likely
the other one is feeding, one is sleeping, the
other is sleeping and very importantly, they're also coordinating
and sharing parental duties. They take care of the
young together. You ask a question about how peer
living and peer bonding relate. They relate a lot.
But here is where I am guilty of sometimes
having discussed peer bonding in all monkeys in the
field without really having the robust evidence for a
pair bond that we may have for some pair
bonded mammals in captivity. This is a good opportunity
for me to discuss how important how enriching it
is to combine what you can learn from studying
animals in the wild and you can what you
can learn from studying animals in captivity. Our monkeys
function in the wild in a way that it
is suggestive of having a very strong pair bond.
When we talk about a pair bond, we are
usually implying some kind of physiological process by which
two individuals, let's talk first about a bond. People
are very familiar with the bond between a mother
and an offspring. Not so much, not so much
familiar, the bond exists between a father and an
offspring. What do we mean by that? What do
we mean by the mother offspring bond? We mean
that there's some physiological process by which those two
individuals are emotionally attached. There is some extent of
dependency of one on the other and vice versa.
There is usually some anxiety, some stress if that
relationship is terminated, right? The same happens with an
adult male and adult female in many bird species.
And in some mammal species including the titty monkeys
that my colleagues led by by former advisor Bill
Mason Sally Mendoza. And in the last 20 years,
caring males have studied in great detail at the
California Primate Center in the US. So we have
evidence for TV, monkeys that the male and the
female are emotionally connected, they, they seek each other,
they prefer each other and they are stressed when
they cannot count on each other. Do we have
those data? Do we have the kind of detailed
data my colleagues have for TD monkeys which I
studied back in the day for the gual monkeys?
No, we don't, but we allow ourselves to make
the inference that their behavioral patterns seem to reflect
what is probably a physiologically driven, maintained pair bond.
Uh THE, the, the, the very, very rich but
anecdotal evidence we have of this in the field
is that for 20 years, we have regularly captured
one of the two adults in the pair to
feed them with a radio color. And when that
happens, when you take the male or the female
from the pair, there is quite a fascinating response
by the remaining adult who doesn't run away, stays
near the place where we doing the physical exam
of his or her partner calling. So that has
been, we never planned this. It so happened, we
need to do it. That has been our little
semi experiment of disrupting the relationship and assessing how
the partner left behind responded. So that's what I
mean by peer living pair bonding. Uh We do
see also behavioral evidence of what seems to be
a very strong attachment of the infants to the
fathers, something that we know as well from TD
monkeys in the field and in captivity.
So I guess that perhaps this will be a
good point to introduce the topic of bi parental
care, which is something that we've already been alluding
to several times in our conversation. So what conditions
favor the evolution of bi parental care
by buying parental care? Of course, we're referring to
a system of care where both parents provide care
very, very frequent, say in birds, very frequent in
fish, but not so frequent in mammals. But remember
birds and fish do not have a pregnancy, do
not have lactation. So, uh mammals like in primates,
like in our monkeys and tty monkeys, the expectation
is that ok, maybe we do not need a
male as long as the female carries on a
successful pregnancy and then nurses the infant. That's all
it takes because in fact, we do see that
in a lot of other mammals where the involvement
of the male is, is trivial or non existent.
But that isn't the case in titty monkeys, our
monkeys and also Khali Rich, which is another group
of primates from South America. In this taxi, this
range of species, the male is actively involved in
providing care to the young. What is it that
the male does when you were asking, let me
describe what we mean by by panel care that
we get into. What is it that may be
favoring the evolution of this in the case of
a Maki anis is quite remarkable when I'm asked,
what is the single, if, if, if I had
to choose one single characteristic of alma anti mais
that makes them unique. I think it is without
any doubts, the commitment of the males to the
kid of the young. I know of no other
mammal on earth where the males are as committed
as fathers, as titty monkeys and owl monkeys. Just
from a few days after birth, the male will
actively seek to engage to interact with a newborn
for the first time in 27 years. Now, 18
months ago, we saw a live birth in the
forest of Argentina sometime around 11 in the morning.
And for the first time from a wide group
of all monkeys, some assistants were able to see
how the male was right there. It was like
having the male in the, in the same room
in the delivery room. The baby is not yet
completely out of the mom's wound and the father
was there licking sniffing, interacting with mother and the
infant a few days after the infant is born,
the male may also get closer to the female
and between them both, they may transfer the infant
to the male. And I wanna say a week
definitely two weeks after the infant is born, most
of the times the infant will be transported, carried
by the father. So here I'm using male and
father for the Almay of Argentina quick and confidently
call it the father. We know it is the
genetic father and that relationship goes on and it
goes on through, through the through infancy, through the
juvenile period. Even through s adulthood, we have very
robust data showing that there is from all these
various stages of development. The young prefer to approach
to interact to socialize with the father more than
the mother. In fact, through research done by, by
Doctor Alva Garcia de La Chica from Spain who
who did her phd and a postdoc with the
Almay Project. Her analysis has suggested that there are
bigger consequences to the survival of the young when
the father dies than when the mother dies. So
that's where bipart care is. This very profound, a
commitment of the male to providing care to the
young, the male and the female coordinating you. You
need to be close to each other, right? Because
it is still the female who carries on the
the burden of lactating. And we know that's energetically
costly. So male and female really have to be
peer living and coordinate their activities. If, if mom
were nursing the infant and when she's tired of
it, the male were ranging a mile away, seeking
another female, it wouldn't work. You really need to
have a two, a two person system at home.
And so we think that I go back to
what I was saying before about the chicken and
the egg is very, very different to disentangle what
favors what. But when you look another way in
which we can make inferences is to look at
the distribution of these phenotypes of these traits across
the animal kingdom. And consistently, we see that it
is much more likely that you get by parental
care when there is peer living and peer bonding
than the other way around. So evolution is speaking
phylogenetic speaking, there seems to be reasons to suggest
propose that you need to have coordinating peer living,
peer bonding. Why? Because that means proximity. That means
emotional connection. That maybe means faithfulness. Once you have
those conditions settled, then it is much more likely
that the male may be favored if you were
to invest energy on the young. Because by being
close to each other, you reduce the chances of
the extra pair populations. We were discussing before. If
I have been with my partner all along, then
the chances are much higher that I have actually
sired that young. So, evolutionary speaking, it pays off
that I invest energy in a young that I
have sired as opposed to maybe a mating system.
Like we were describing at the beginning where you
have males and females mating with several members of
the other sex. So for mammals that we looked
at when we examined some data in the literature,
this was a study led by my colleague, Marian
Hook where she reviewed the evidence we had for
social monogamy pair bonding and parental care in mammals.
It is usually when you have closely close pairs
as opposed to these first pairs that it is
more likely you get by parental care,
right? And so when it comes to things that
we've been talking about, like for example, per leaving
sexual monogamy and bi parental care, do we know
if a sexual selection plays a role in their
evolution?
Yes. So, so keep it I choose between. Yes
and no. Let's go with. Yes. We have decades
and decades of research. On sexual selection, uh and
with a range of taxa, and sometimes we know,
or we allow ourselves to feel that we have
a very solid understanding because it has been shown
in other taxa in other systems where it is
much more likely to really make the manipulations that
allow you to get closer at understanding the connection
between sexually selected traits and a particular mating system.
Uh One of the areas where people have looked,
a lot of potential relationships between factors is body
size dimorphism. Uh We, we as we have a
lot of data indicating that certain traits in ma
and femurs are sexually selected. It's very interesting that
in pure living primates, we do not have a
lot of sexual dimorphism. And so an argument has
been made and I think again, there's a lot
of data across tax uh suggesting that maybe sexual
dimorphism is related to sexual selection. We do not.
Uh I was saying before how difficult it is,
we cannot really tell males from females without monkeys
and TV monkeys. And this is just to give
you an indication of how complicated it is at
the California prime etcetera where I did my phd
studying T monkeys even today in captivity where you're
looking at the animals say from, from 2 m
away, they tag the males and females with different
tags. It's an exon tag for the males, I
think and a circular one for the females because
you can be standing in front of them and
you cannot tell them apart. So we cannot do
that either with the al monies in the field.
Uh Now going into the genetics of sexual selection,
that is much more challenging. And that's where there's
still so much that we need to do identifying
traits for which we know the genetic basis that
are related. For example, to the tendencies to provide
care in males and females. We we don't really
have that information in Almay or for any primate,
the way in which we approach that is to
look maybe at endocrinological profiles associated with parenting in
the K rids that I was mentioning before that
also have peer bonding and they also have paternal
care. My colleagues, I'm thinking of Tony Ziegler or
Jack Snow on. But I'm being unfair to so
many of my colleagues who can work with the
electrics in captivity. They have shown that in these
males that provide a lot of parental care, sometimes
you have some of the same hormones and same
hormonal levels that you see in mothers who are
providing care. So it is a very reasonable assumption
that there has to be some genetics underlying these
hormonal profiles in males and females that are so
similar in situations where the male and the female
are both providing care. But but it's still, I
mean, behavioral genetics as we call it, understand the
true genetic basis of complex behaviors like infant care
or peer bonding. Uh We are still very far
from understanding how those things, how those trades get
selected.
So I would like to ask you now a
little bit about co-operative breathing. Uh ON the show,
I've already talked with several anthropologists over the years
uh about the cooper breathing in humans in human
societies. I don't know if you also want to
get a, a little bit into that. But does
it also occur in other primate species?
Yes, it does occur. Uh Let's, we, we can
look back to the first question we were discussing,
which was the range of mating systems we have
in primates. And I, I remember, I, I told
you how, well f first, very basically, what do
we mean by competitive breeding? And, and of course,
among us, biological anthropologist and, and we can qui
like about that, we end up writing reviews about,
but for the purpose of having a fun conversation,
let's decide that the definition is rather straightforward. To
me. Cooper breath, you have a number of individuals
cooperating in the taking care, raising of the young
in a given group. Uh In some situations, people
would argue that you have cooper breeding where there's
only one female who's the one reproducing and then
males in that group, but also relatives, siblings and
grandparents and grandmothers and grandfathers are all helping. We
do see not it down monkeys and the titty
monkeys. Let's address them first because they leave us
with a very interesting topic that we have not
fully explored. Siblings don't help in our monkeys and
titty monkeys. So you have your peer living species.
Mom, dad, a couple of, there's an infant, there's
a toddler and I have some juveniles and some
adults and we just have no idea why their
help is not recruited. It doesn't happen in captivity.
It doesn't happen in the wild. It doesn't have
importunities for all monkeys. But in other taxa in
the calitri of South America where mom may have
twins with some frequency and sometimes they may have
twins a couple of times a year. The siblings
help and more than one male may help take
care of those young. So yes, we do have
the kind of situation that has been used to
refer to cooper breeding in humans. It takes a
village, well, maybe not a village for the colored
treats, but definitely more than mom and dad, mom,
dad, siblings and some other females and males who
may be related to those young. But for us,
it's something we, we need, we need still to
explore. Why don't the siblings in our monkeys and
TV monkeys contribute. Uh Yeah, it's interesting. I imagine
they're probably better off just putting all that energy
into growing healthy and preparing themselves for competing in
securing their own mates in the future.
By the way, when it comes to co-operative breeding,
and now we're talking mostly about other primate species
and not so much humans. Do we know if
there is always necessarily some sort of genetic relatedness
between uh the cooper breathers and the infants or
not?
We don't have a lot of data for that
in the Colored Treaties, but there are some studies
uh reporting that there is relatedness. Uh I have
to admit the, the names of my colleagues who
led those studies are escaping me. So we have
some data for the colored trid in terms of
relatedness now with non humans. What's also what's interesting
I think is that if people have asked me
if we were to swap, I mean, if you
were able to take an infant out monkey and
remove it and bring a substitute, would it change?
My guess is if you did it right away
from the go I, I'd be surprised if the
father, if the male doesn't take care of that
young, who is not now, not his desire. Uh
So uh yes, we do have information on relatedness
and it because we know that sometimes it is,
for example, in the colored rich, sometimes it is
brothers who help take care of the twins that
the female has sired. And sometimes we have in
colored rich. Its that more than one male is
really mating with a female. That's why I was
saying before that in those systems, we have what
we call polyandry. The female mating with several males.
So that would be a potential explanation for why
those males may be helping because again, there is
a likelihood that they have sired those young.
Mhm. And do we know exactly what predicts the
evolution of co-operative breeding in particular species?
No, we don't know anything very precisely. That would
be. No. But really, I mean, that, that's the
another conversation we can have one day we need
to tone down. And so we go into the
classroom and teach our entry level students how science
work and how science is self correct itself and
we get it wrong and we try again, but
we seem to forget about those lectures when we
write the papers. So uh no, I don't know.
I would again choosing between. Yes and no, I
would say no, we don't. But so, so your
question was, do we know effectively if cooper breeding
repeat me basically
what factors predict the evolution of cooper breeding in
particular species?
Uh No, I think we, it's, it's I I'll
try to answer it the same way that we
explore what we know about the factors that may
influence the evolution of, of peer bonding or monogamy.
Uh And so in humans, it's been argued that
because humans as a species have so many life
history traits that are so profoundly different from life
history traits in other species, it may have been
that by having cooperated breeding, that has completely redesigned
the energetic balance of all the actors involved and
may have allowed humans to have a rate of
reproduction that's unparalleled with other taxa. Uh People have
argued that maybe that's the reason that you also
have in the ked riches which have cooperated breeding
the production of twins. But the production of twins
is such a rare event, at least for all
the primates in the Americas that it is my
understanding that that is still an unresolved issue. So
people have argued have hypothesized that it probably is
related to changes and the pros and cons and
the tradeoffs in life history, traits of humans or
other species with competitive breeding in relationship to those
where there is no competitive breeding. But there have
also been, again, it's making me think about your
initial question on factors promoting monogamy for birds. People
have examined the extent to which it is environmental
unpredictability that may be related to the the evolution
of competitive breeding in birds. Uh So uh many,
many possibilities, many hypothesis. It is possible that for
us to get closer to a more a better
predictive answer would have to narrow down the scope
of tax for which we're developing our hypothetical models.
And instead of trying to understand the evolution of
competitivity in birds, it'd be interesting to see what
we learn, trying to go going narrower and deeper.
I it's something that some colleagues are doing, of
course.
So I have one more question about co-operative breathing
here before we change topics. So is there any
evidence that cooper breeding might favor in any way
the evolution of enhanced social cognition or larger breeds.
It has been suggested and, and there have been
hypothesis proposed on that. Uh What is interesting? I
am a little bit on, on the side of
this intellectual, very interesting conversation. I have not really
contributed any, any primary research to the to the
debate. Uh My my impression is that the, it
is not very clear. And if things get much
more complicated when you go outside primates and look
at other tasks to understand if it is really
that competitive breeding uh is related to the kind
of development of cognition and brain size that people
have argued for primates comes to my mind. Uh
STUDIES by Alex Thornton and and Kathy mccloud who
have argued that they have all kinds of evidence
from if I remember away from captivity on, on
birds where maybe there is not as much data
suggesting this. But I think again, it will probably
make more progress in going smaller than bigger. Uh
You cannot expect to have one explanation, explain the
whole diversity of these patterns. But I'm not, I'm
probably not as qualified to comment much on, on,
on social cognition and larger brains. It's, it's quite
outside my area of, of interest and ex of
expertise. Definitely. Mhm
So let's get into the last topic of our
conversation today. And I would like to ask you
now about natal dispersal. What is that exactly?
Natal dispersal refers to the process by which an
individual leaves the area where it was born leaves
disperses from the area where it was born. The
natal area. And it is a very important process
in the life of an individual because it's gonna
have all kinds of consequences regarding its future. Social
and mating interactions. Take, take it to an extreme
if you're born in a family and you don't
disperse. If you say I'm gonna stay poor, well,
your opportunities for reproduction are gonna be limited most
likely to your father, your mother and your siblings,
and evolutionary speaking, we don't have reasons to believe
that would be an evolutionary stable strategy. So animals
disperse and when they disperse, which of the two
sexes disperses or if both sexes disperses, it has
been a very important area of research in behavioral
ecology for all taxa in monogamous, impair living taxa,
monkeys, primates, mammals, pers, you name them. The expectation
is that both sexes ought to disperse. And that
was the way it's been always considered in the
literature because drawing from the bird literature for a
long time, the assumption was that these pairs were
living together for very prolonged periods, right? They were
pairing for life. And so if the assumption is
that the same male and the same femur are
caring for life in this area, any offspring born
to them or to the birds. So, so, so
that they avoid mating with your parents as we
learned in birds and in other tracks including primates,
that pairs are not always long lasting. It is
possible that now males and females may not disperse
because their parents have been replaced. We have looked
at natal dispersal in great detail. In good part
letter by, by my colleague, Dr Maggie Corley who
did her phd and then continued doing all kinds
of endocrinological behavioral and genetic analysis on natal dispersal.
And in the case of all monkeys like TD,
we know that both sexes disperse, it kind of
makes sense. But what we're learning now, what we're
trying to understand is what are the possible reasons?
What are the possible factors influencing when to disperse?
And this is just work that we are, we're
getting ready to publish, finally being able to look
at the genetics and what Maggie we call Maggie
Corley found is that there seems to be a
tendency for the animals to disperse sooner or later
in relationship to who of the parents are still
in the group. Something we didn't talk about when
discussing our monkeys and social systems is that the
Almay population in Formosa allowed us to discover something
that has not been reported consistently in, in many
mammals, which is the existence of floaters. The animals
who disperse don't get to find a partner right
away, but the range alone is like mom, dad,
I'm leaving. Ok. Go. What are you gonna do.
I don't know, I'm gonna move around and see
if I find a partner. And so they move
around and they try to find a partner. But
the problem is that we do not have in
the Almay population in Formosa, anything like bars or
these young adults moving around trying to find partners
can get together and form a new family. So
the solution the young monkeys are playing out is
that my way to find a family is to
really kick out from a home, the same sex
adult who is holding control of their home. So
a young adult male will challenge, fight and sometimes
kick out a stable reproducing adult male and a
young female will fight challenge and sometimes kick out
a reproducing female. So now if you are the
young who is pondering, do I disperse or not?
You may find yourself that your biological father is
no more. Now you have a stepfather or maybe
you have a stepmother or maybe you have both
stepfather and stepmother. And so that changes completely, completely.
So many aspects of how we're examining behavioral patterns,
demographic consequences of all these processes. Because what we're
learning is that when for an owl monkey, when
the parent of the same sex has been, I'm
sorry, when the parent of the opposite sex has
been replaced, they tend to stay longer. I'm a
female and I'm pondering. Should I leave home or
not? I suddenly I realized that that is not
here anymore. Now, there is a stepfather, a stepfather
that presumably are not related to. So that's the
father may become every productive opportunity I stay longer.
So those are analysis that we, we haven't published
yet. We're working on it. But they connect the
process of this pars the timing on this par
with the genetics of group composition and in breeding
avoidance.
OK. So let me ask you perhaps one final
question. Then I think that when talking about owl
monkeys and the timing of their natal dispersal, you
focus there mostly on social factors, right? Are there
any other kinds of factors like for example, ecological
factors that might also play a role in explaining
the timing of their dispersal?
Absolutely. And we, we did look into ecological factors
and environmental factors in our forest. It's probably not
the ideal situation to examine those because we work
in a very, very seasonal environment. So sometimes uh
uh when, when things are so seasonal, there are
some aspects of the life history of the animal
that match. So you take, take the spring period.
So the spring period is the period when the
babies are born, but it's also the pure when
food is more abundant. So, so it becomes complicated
to these entangled factors. But what we're finding is
that the environment is not as a strong predictor
of when the animals disperse as maybe some social
factors and all the social factors that we have
been considering it is really relatedness which seems to
be the the more predictive factor than others. But
even when we see this parcel all around the
year in Argentina, this parcel goes down, the rate
of this parcel is lower in the winter when
temperatures are lower and there's less abundance of food
because one of the factors that seems reasonable animals
in an evolutionary framework may have played a role
is that you need to disperse at a time
when you can cope with the disadvantages, not being
in a social group. And one of the advantages
of being in a social group can be things
like thermal regulation. The the chaco region of Argentina
gets cold and in the winter, you will see
the animals huddling and sleeping together. Now, if you're
on your own, wandering around at night, during the
day, in a cold forest, maybe that may be
a disadvantage that doesn't play to you in evolutionary
terms. And the animals may be dispersing at a
time when it's less challenging in terms of thermal
regulation or in terms of finding enough food outside
of your home.
Mhm Great. So Doctor Fernandez Duque, just before we
go, would you like to tell people where they
can find you and your work on the internet?
Yes. Uh We have a, we have a website
for the Almony project and if you just type
that you'll come across that and I do have
my own personal website that also provides links to
the project to Fundacion Eco. Uh When I started
my work in the province of Formosa Argentina, we
established Fundacion Eco, which is an NGO that promotes
education in the country. So you can also look
there and, but I think either my site or
the Almay projects, I should give you plenty of
information for the Almay research. I'm very proud to
say that as of this month. In fact, we
have just published, I have just published an edited
volume that summarizes 30 years of research on all
monkeys from Panama to Argentina. This is a book
published by Springer and it's available. The E book
is free of charge and you can find all
types of research data. 60 colleagues of mine, we
have all put together uh spanning the research on
our monkeys that has been done from Panama down
to Argentina, including also research led by my colleagues
in the US who have been working with our
monkeys for a very, very long time. So Al
Monkey book by Springer is a wonderful resource and
it's available free of charge as an E book.
You can find all you need about al monkeys
there.
Great. So I'm leaving some links to that in
the description box of this interview. And Doctor Fernandez
Duque, thank you so much again for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
pleasure to talk to you.
Thank you Ricardo. Pleasure joining you and thanks for
the time and the opportunity to share all this
information about our research.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitten
bear, no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
ma J and Lain Jung. Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J Tom Hummel s friends,
David Sloan Wilson Yaar, Roman Roach Diego and Jan
Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba Adam Hunt, Pavlo
Stassi Nale medicine, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari and
YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas
Fry Franka Gilon Cortez or Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophano,
Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams, the Ausa
Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie
Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey Junior, old Ebon Starry Michael
Bailey. Then spur by Robert Grassy. Zorn, Jeff mcmahon,
Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke
Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica, a
week in the B brand Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley
Man George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perros, Kate Van Goler,
Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular
J Ner Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins
of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers is our web, Jim
Frank Luca Toni, Tom Ween, Bernardine N Corti Dixon,
Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John
Carlo Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to
my executive producers, Matthew lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knits
and Rosie. Thank you for all.